the United Kingdom we now go across to
under my clothes and they might Donald
mr. speaker yesterday the government
gave trade unions just 12 hours to
respond to second consultation papers on
the safe return to work the entire
country wants the government to succeed
but this is not how to build confidence
or trust the proposals talk about what
they expect employers to consider and
say a social distancing and hand-washing
should happen where possible to help
with insufficient attention being fair
to PBA taking the necessary steps to
protect employees is not a matter of
expectation or of guidance it is the law
so will the Minister confirm that covin
19 risk assessments will be mandatory
for most businesses that they will be
made public and registered with the HSE
and given the lack of capacity for
inspections the workplace health and
safety reps are involved in the settling
of assessments than their implementation
and enforcement and they'll be able to
assist in non-unionized supply chain
companies mr. thank you we are engaging
with businesses business representatives
organizations and unions to come to a
shared view on how to make our places as
safe as possible for when people return
to work and I can assure you that we are
also involved in public health England
and the health and safety exact minister
we have a question from Andrew Griffith
a substantive question Minister thank
you I thank my honourable friend for his
question the UK Space Agency working
with NHS England and the European Space
Agency has made 2.6 million pounds
available for two closed market ideas to
manage pandemics a new fast contracting
process will ensure swift development
the agency is also working with the UK
research and innovation to explore how
drones can support health services and
do Griffith going over to one regret
different Thank You mr. speaker could I
join my rifle and my friend in thanking
the space industry for their help with
the cry
it's what the minister agree with me the
investment in the UK space sector has a
vital role in growing the UK economy and
could she confirm the program such as
GNSS and Skynet six are moving ahead at
Pace Minister thank you the unremember
is absolutely right the growing UK space
sector employs 42,000 people and
contributes 300 billion pounds to the
world's wider economy
why don't you K economy by providing
satellite services on which many
industries rely the UK Space Agency
continues to investigate the
requirements design specifications and
cost of a UK Gianna's capability and is
working closely with the Ministry of
Defence to support activities under the
sky net contract we're working hard to
develop a UK space strategy to generate
further economic growth across the
country I will know called minister
cotton to answer the substantive
question that's being tabled by Sir
Edward Lee
I know core minister Mustang Thank You
mr. speaker
the government is doing everything at
its disposal to support businesses
through the crisis and beyond the
department is maintaining an ongoing
dialogue with key stakeholders
representing the country's small
businesses the FSB regularly
participates in the business sector is
twice weekly call and regularly engage
with my department on a number of issues
relating to Kovan 99 we go over to Sir
Edwards rapidly the best way properly to
help small business in rural areas like
ligature is to beef up broadband that's
long term but in the short term with the
minister except that the best way to
help businesses let them do business not
subsidize them to close and then we have
to help vulnerable people but it's not
gonna help the vulnerable in the long
term if we crash the economy so is the
government working full pelt are
obviously consistent with proper social
justice cream to get business back to
work yeah my run normal friend is quite
right we want to focus on getting
business back to work
but these lockdown measures were
introduced to protect lives relaxing the
measures we feel too much would risk
damage to public health our economy and
all the sacrifices that we've all made
as my right honourable friend or a
section of State for Education said last
week it is incredibly important that we
create environments that are safe to
work and learning we will adjust
lockdown measures when the scientific
advice indicates it is safe to do so
we have Laura Forrest with the
substantive question minister with your
permission sir I will group questions
this question with 15 questions 15 16
and 17 my department is supporting
businesses through the corona business
coronavirus business interruption loan
scheme in addition to these programs
we're providing grants for small
businesses linked to their business
rates status and we are scrapping
business rates this year for those in
the hospitality retail and leisure
sectors we've also set up a package of
support which will offer 1.25 billion
pounds for high-growth firms and today
we are launching a scheme providing
bounce back loans of up to 50,000 pounds
to small businesses we go over to Laura
Ferris Laura thoris Thank You mr.
speaker I represent a number of
businesses in Newbury specializing in
renewable energy a secondary effect of
the pandemic has been a collapse and
demand for fossil fuel when the economy
begins its recovery what support my
honourable friend give to clean energy
suppliers to ensure a greener and more
resilient energy infrastructure Minister
thank you sir
my honorable friend is quite right we
are absolutely committed to Net Zero and
will continue to support the development
of clean energy the forth contracts for
different allocation round will take
place next year bringing forward new
renewable electricity projects and
creating further demand for the many
businesses across the UK that supply
them this unprecedented package of
support for businesses that we mentioned
we've mentioned earlier will help ensure
businesses in the clean energy sector
the other they can contribute to driving
economic recovery after this pandemic
though your cross to marco's fish
Marcus fish Thank You mr. speaker can
government please give local authorities
and Ellie peas real-time access to
sector level information about the
furloughs and redundancies and back
ambitious enterprise and incentive
schemes for them to help businesses
recover and transform after the virus
militia think my animal friend raises a
really important point I think in terms
of the flow of information that's
absolutely key to dealing with the
crisis and I'm very happy to meet with
him to discuss the specifics of his
constituency businesses and I'll raise
the issues of access to specific data
with my right honorable friends the
chance of the Exchequer and also the
sector of State for Work and Pensions we
go over to Colburn Elliott Colburn Thank
You mr. speaker and I've had a number of
businesses from kosheh Wallington get in
touch who weren't eligible for the first
round of grants such as those in shared
offices and there are lovely Park cafes
does the minister agree with me the
council should make use of the
discretionary funds announced over the
weekend to help these businesses through
the pandemic finished up thank you very
much sir we've recognized that there are
businesses in shared work packed spaces
in particular with relatively high fixed
costs related to rent payments for
example and they haven't been able to
benefit directly from these grants and I
know that my honourable friend has
raised this issue with my department as
a result of his lobbying our on Friday
my right honourable friend the sector of
State for business announced additional
funding to local authorities
administering the two grant funds this
will help support businesses that are
currently out of scope but I strongly
recommend his input in this and I think
local authorities now can provide grants
to small businesses in a variety of
shared work places in space we now go
across the room on Tuesday
to stay Thank You mr. speaker local
businesses engineering and Raynham have
asked me to ask the minister to clarify
what help is being given to those
self-employed business owners and
partners that earn over fifty thousand
pound threshold some of these businesses
cannot further any or only some of their
start and business interruption loans
still need to be paid at a later date
can the minister clarify what support is
available to those that fall into this
category start firstly I'd like to
clarify the opposite our current
position we prioritize helping the
greatest number of people as quickly as
possible and in order to target that
support of those most in need the
government has chosen to cap the
self-employment income support scheme
now those not able to access this scheme
may be able to access other wide-ranging
measures that the government is
providing are designed to support
businesses across all sectors during
these difficult times and I'm very happy
for him
to engage with the department and myself
on this very issue
I know called ministered Nadeem sahar
way to answer the substantive question
that's been tabled by Hana Badal
Minister thank you very much mr. speaker
I with your permission we would like to
answer this question together with
question 19 my department is working
closely with the Treasury on the
coronavirus job retention scheme and the
wider government response in developing
the scheme speaker the government has
prioritized helping the greatest number
of people as quickly as possible go over
to a Hannah bubble and the barbell thank
you very much mr. speaker
and whilst the additional flexibility is
welcome the job retention scheme does
nothing for those I said it's arbitrary
limits like my Livingston constituent
still mason Jason Hoffman he has a small
limited business and makes up a modest
salary with legal and tax efficient
annual dividends in Jason's case he
doesn't qualify for the scheme he isn't
eligible for universal credit and he
can't Fertile himself because he
couldn't bid for work and his business
or his business would collapse so how
many small businesses like Jason's will
be destroyed before this conservative
government finally listens
includes them in the scheme and what
comfort can he give to my constituent to
D minister thank you very much mister
pika as I said earlier what we've tried
to do speakers prioritize helping the
greatest number of people as quickly as
possible
in terms of making sure that other
people can be helped
including those who are self-employed
that a scheme for them is also available
and we've tried to do as much as we can
through grants as well through local
government including 617 million in
discretionary grants for businesses who
may not be registered for business rates
who can get that additional help was
announced over the last 40 hours we go
over to govern Newlands govern Newlands
yeah thank you very much mr. speaker
yeah I'm not entirely sure that the
minister or eccentricity is actually
listening because the truth is they turn
a virus business Lincecum's
aren't working in part because someone
does don't trust the government to stand
behind their one County with a
potentially moving the golf course at a
future date it'll open here's just one
of the many businesses in my
constituency in with an object access
scheme through an overly cautious and
risk-averse Linda so what can a minister
and his colleagues in the Treasury do
about this Minister I I'm sorry the on
whatever feels that way but his
counterpart Fiona hislop in the sort of
government who I speak to every week as
I do with Ken skates in Wales and and
Dodds in Northern Ireland on our weekly
calls thinks actually the schemes are
working well we have improved them as
we've reviewed them and made them better
and we've launched the bounce-back
scheme which is much simpler to
250-thousand that can get money in the
bank within 24 hours
we have a substantive question from
Clyde Barb's Minister live efforts to be
answered thank you very much mr. speaker
profiteering in PP is completely
unacceptable and I want to be clear that
no one should be seeking to exploit this
health emergency financial gain that
could thank you mister speaking about
this a very disappointing answer because
this problem has been added to by the
failure of the government to stop while
PP
and there are numerous examples of
people exploiting this situation so it's
only going to get worse if the
government does not act quickly so
Willie could commit to legislating to
take power to act against these
operators who are exploiting this
situation Minister thank you very much
mr. speaker
the accomplishes and Markets Authority
mr. speaker has already written to the
small number of firms suspected of
profiteering and the secretary state has
recently met with the businesses and
consumer representatives to discuss what
further action might be necessary to
address this issue the vast majority of
firms mr. speaker and I have to put this
on record are acting responsibly and we
have seen so many across the UK
supporting the national effort to tackle
Cawood 19 such as BrewDog Diageo and
hundreds of small operators across the
country but as I said the city of state
keeps the option always open we now come
to questions the Chancellor of the Duchy
of Lancaster and the Minister for the
Cabinet Office
I will first call the Chancellor of
Duchy of Lancaster to answer any
substantive the substantive question
that's being tabled by Graeme our Dutch
in Lancaster secular state thank you
very much mr. speaker
um with your permission I will answer
questions 1 2 or rather bracket
questions 1 2 3 & 4 together every NHS
and care worker must get the personal
protective equipment they need that is
why we've appointed Lord a Shinto Li the
national effort to boost PPE production
and also to support the scaling up of
engineering efforts for small companies
capable of contributing to supplies we
go over to Greg Morris Bray Morris mr.
speaker companies and consult here came
forward with offices to manufacture on
the supply personal protective equipment
including the protecting heroes
Community Interest Kony and
manufacturing plus T Rises F the fur
face masks however in the weeks after
the pandemic began how many of these
offers didn't receive apply for weeks
resulting in some businesses selling
vital PPP the equipment abroad and
indeed I'd like to ask the minister what
were the reasons for the delay in
processing in responding to such offers
and has the government now established a
more timely and efficient system for
doing secular states thank you very much
mr. speaker and I am grateful to the
Honourable member for his question we
have received 12,000 789 offers of help
with the provision of personal
protective equipment and 10,000 436 of
those who have made those offers have
now been contacted of course I'm sure
the house will appreciate that many of
those who make offers of help
well-intentioned and generous are making
offers of help for personal protective
equipment that may not be appropriate in
health and social care settings and we
must ensure that we have appropriate PPE
in appropriate settings
we now go across to Marcus with Marcus
world Thank You mr. speaker I've been
assisting manufacturers within Juba
Muirfield
and Debbie Gail to register as potential
suppliers of PPE on the government a
portal and I'm pleased that these
businesses are now being responded to by
the Cabinet Office could my right
honourable friend obviously just confirm
down the register on the site nationally
but when confirm when they are likely to
start receiving orders for PPE the ones
that register say go state I'm very
grateful to my honourable friend for
they work that he along with so many
others have done in order to ensure that
general's office of support can be
processed efficiently as I mentioned we
have 10,000 436 organizations with whom
we've been in contact but specifically
when it comes to UK manufacturing there
are 201 manufacturers with whom were in
touch at the moment 180 of whom are
qualified to provide PPE and 22 of whom
are going through the technical product
review necessary in order to ensure that
their personal protective equipment is
appropriate we now go over to Gary
sambro
Gary son Brooke Thank You mr. speaker
whilst a number of offers of help from
UK manufacturers
to produce PPS hi unfortunately many
simply won't be able to meet the medical
standards required what happened the
government give to those companies who
wish to play bad parts in this national
effort grateful Thursday forgive me
again I'm grateful to my honourable
friend for the the efforts he and his
constituents are making it is the case
that specifications of the type of
personal protective equipment required
in health and social care settings has
been shared by the NHS and by public
health England but it is also the case
that companies are a conversation with
the Department of Health and Social Care
about what more they might be able to do
to augment those who are not necessarily
operating in those settings go to Nigel
Mills Nigel Mills
I thank the epiphysis and also John
plaintiff school number Olli who've been
making a PB for healthcare providers
would he agree we're gonna need UK
manufacturers to keep making this
equipment for the long term therefore
they were two the last procurement rules
to be able to have some longer term
contracts they can get maximum
efficiency in producing this equipment
so go state my humble friend makes a
very important point we do need to show
flexibility in the way in which
procurement operates particularly in
order to ensure that we have domestic
production in the future upon which we
can rely and my rajala friend Lord
Dayton is leading the work in this area
and I'll go over to shadow secular state
right to Reeves Thank You mr. speaker
colleagues have made important points
about shortages of PPE those who look
after the sick and the vulnerable
deserve our protection and getting PPE
to them is all of our priority the prime
minister said last week that as part of
coming out of the lockdown face
coverings will be useful as the minister
knows in Germany and France it is now
required or advised to wear a face masks
on public transport and elsewhere so can
I ask the minister as the government
looks to announce plans to ease some of
our lockdown restrictions how many face
masks suitable for wearing by the public
are currently available and what work is
being done with health experts to ensure
that the face coverings that people are
using are sufficient quality to stop the
virus from spreading
Segrest a
I'm very grateful to the honorable lady
for her questions she is right that
there are other European countries which
are prescribing face coverings
particularly in public transport and in
other settings where a number of people
congregate we follow the scientific
advice and there is a clear distinction
as I know she knows between the
sophisticated type of face mask that
would be appropriate in a surgical or
social care setting and their sort of
face covering that can be used by
individuals in order to shield others
because it's important to recognize the
wearing of these face coverings affords
no protection to the individual but
properly worn they can be a contribution
to making sure that others are protected
from the aerosols from the droplets but
all of us might when we cough or sneeze
be responsible for producing and it's
why Lord Dayton and my right honorable
friend Lord Agnew are working together
in order to ensure that we can increase
domestic production of just such face
coverings right to roofs
I thank the Minister for that but it is
a huge concern that he lacks clear
answers to the questions that I put
especially given the ongoing fiasco with
getting PPE to health and social care
workers and so I ask again how many of
these face masks for public use are
currently available and other countries
mr. speaker are ahead of us France has
increased production and procurement to
around 8 million masks per week the
Japanese government is sending masks to
50 million households so can I ask the
minister what is the government doing to
ensure that must have distributed to all
those who need them and given that the
government was slow to engage the UK
textile and manufacturing sector in the
production of PPE for frontline workers
what is the government doing to ensure
that production of mask by British
manufacturers is increased looking
forward to what might come next
jagira State or the Honourable lady
again makes a a series of important
points in terms of numbers of masks that
have been distributed over all from the
25th of February to the 3rd of May we
distributed one 152 million masks and
just on the 3rd of May we distributed to
2.7 million masks now of course it is
the case but for those masks that are
appropriate in surgical settings we do
need to have a particular material a
melt blown plastic which is appropriate
in order
to provide the necessary protection for
those wearing those masks and we have
been in touch with the specific
suppliers of that type of material here
in the United Kingdom it has also case
the supplies of those materials tend to
predominate in countries which have
petrochemical industries and we've been
in touch with those including in the
Gulf in order to provide it but they are
a very different type of material from
the type of face covering that would be
appropriate on public transport or
elsewhere and that is a very different
exercise and the numbers of course of
which we can produce of those would be
significantly greater because we don't
have a reliance as I say on that melt
down plastic that can generally only be
provided by other countries will there
brag thank you very much mr. speaker one
of the the key issues on this rather
vexed subject is the transparency I
wonder if my writeable friend would
consider releasing the figures which he
and other members of government have
made aware of each morning on the
Cabinet Office dashboard to show stocks
and quantities of PPE set against demand
so respect will my own girlfriend makes
an important point it is the
responsibility of all of us do
everything we can in order to ensure
that we have visibility on the need for
PPE that is why NHS trusts and others
report on their stocks and the
additional requirements that they have
it's also why we have ensured that
across the resilience fora that we have
in this country which are responsible
for the distribution of PPE to more than
58,000 settings we've seen something
like 57 million pieces of PPE
distributed but again my honourable
friend makes an important point about
improving the visibility that we all
have and I will talk to my right
honourable friend the sector State for
Health and Social Care about just that
Paul Leonard substantive question
secretary thank you very much mr.
speaker
my department and the Department of
Health and Social Care have been working
with a variety of UK manufacturers in
order to increase the supply of
ventilators to the NHS we've placed an
order with one in particular pen LAN for
15 thousand additional ventilators and
unpleased see so many UK manufacturers
and medical supply companies working so
well together in order to ensure that we
can increase domestic supply Wilbur to
Derbyshire Poli later to make the extra
ventilators needed companies that do not
normally make them like Dyson
rolls-royce mistake yes of course we've
been working with at the moment eleven
new potential or existing potential
suppliers but over five thousand
businesses have been involved offering
to provide services because of course
when you're producing a complex machine
like a ventilator then you need to make
sure that you source everything from the
appropriate batteries the appropriate
vowels the appropriate other technology
and as I say 5000 businesses including
rolls-royce have been involved in the
manufacture we now could sector state
substantive quite to mice treating to
step with your permission Mr Speaker I
will take questions 9 10 and 11th
together from the 20th to 24th of April
a full and constructive negotiating
round took place with a full range of
discussions across all work streams our
next scheduled round of talks with our
EU friends will take place on the week
beginning the 11th of May Thank You mr.
speaker
everyone will understand that we've left
the European Union and everyone would
understand that the impact of kogut 19
might have an impact on the timetable
for negotiating our future relationship
so why won't the Minister give
businesses the reassurance they need
that if the government needs more time
it will take more time is it is it dogma
is it vanity or is it paranoia so much
tape well it's a helpful list of
conditions which
the Honorable friend about my prefer the
Honorable member list but it's none of
those um it's playing prudence will be
to perpetuate our membership of the
European Union light through the
transition period we would end up
spending more taxpayers money which
could be spent on the NHS we would have
to accept new EU rules that might
constrain our ability to fight covered
19 and to deal with other crises and we
would of course be unfortunately and
unfair they trespassing on the e u--'s
need to concentrate on other vital
priorities we go over to Nick Fletcher
Mick Fletcher
Thank You mr. speaker cameras are more
friendly for my constituents in
downvalley whether the covered 19
pandemic is likely to lead to an
extension of the transition area service
tape I can reassure my honourable friend
and the good people of Don Valley that
the government is not going to extend
the transition period at the end of this
year we go over to Alan dorrance Alan
Dorrans Thank You mr. speaker
Michelle bar near the leader of the EU
negotiating team has expressed
frustration that the UK's negotiators
seem happy to run down the clock to
leave the transition with no deal in
place at the end of this year we've
already held repeated warnings of the
perils of a cliff edge breaks it which
could be calamitous for the economy at
the time your business of fragile and
crave stability will the Chancellor of
the Duchy do the right thing by assuring
that his party has not bring about this
calamity
so estate I'm grateful to the honourable
gentleman for raising this issue there
have been cordial conversations and
negotiations between our negotiator
David Frost and Michel Barnier
and I would not want to prejudice those
by making any criticism of Michel Barney
other than to say that he will negotiate
hard on behalf of the Commission but we
will negotiate hard on behalf of the
whole United Kingdom we go over to Pete
wish our people were sharp and thank you
very much mr. speaker it's not the case
that businesses want more than anything
else is certainty that this government
wouldn't do anything to compare the
economic difficulties caused by this
pandemic the government of course
Pinder Nathan stock covered coming to
shows but it's in their hands to stop
from the economic misery from a
disasters later
does he agree that the last thing
businesses need there's more economic
turbulence and the certainty that we
seek there's a one that says there will
be no New Deal back sir and there will
be an extension to let them recover from
this pandemic so your state well I'm
grateful to the gentleman for the point
he makes there won't be a no deal brexit
we have a deal that deal was legislated
for in the House of Commons and I think
he is right it is important that we give
business certainty I think one of the
best ways of giving business certainty
is recognizing that we respect
referendums that is why this pices voted
to respect the referendum that saw the
British people take us out of the
European Union and I would urge him and
others to respect the referendum which
made it clear that the people of
Scotland want to stay in the United
Kingdom instead of having the damaging
uncertainty of an Indy rf2 hanging over
future investment decisions substantive
question now shall secure state I thank
the Honorable ad for a question linked
to an initial communication problem the
UK did not receive an invitation in time
to join the for EU joint procurements
including on PPE we will however
participate in the EU joint procurement
scheme on therapeutics that is soon to
launch and we will consider
participating in future schemes
including any on PPE on the basis of
public health requirements we know the
other two nuts sure not sure Thank You
mr. speaker the UK has left the EU but
the NHS Confederation and other top
health officials have warned that fairly
to continued cooperation would be a
disaster for public health does the
failure of working together or the pp
equipment signal a new approach by the
government that puts ideology before the
nation's health so no state no we know
go over to Paul vom field
Paul Blomfield mr. speaker it was good
to hear reports this morning that the
government is getting behind the EU LED
international initiatives to find a
corona virus vaccine
so given this approach can the Secretary
of State confirm reports that the
government are now seeking to retain
participation in the --use early warning
and response system for pandemics is
requested by the Department of Health
and NHS providers and will they look
again at participation in the European
Medicines Agency segura state while I'm
grateful to the honourable gentleman for
making that point we will cooperate not
just with our European neighbors but
with other countries in the fight
against poverty
he's right to say that the Prime
Minister is joining the call today in
order to ensure that we can support the
effort to secure a vaccine and they have
a to secure of X is necessarily an
international one and we will of course
look pragmatically at how we can
cooperate with our European friends and
partners but participation in the
European Medicines Agency would involve
certainly at the moment the acceptance
of the European Court of Justices
oversight and that's not something that
the British people voted to do there
live around substantive questions
secular state as I think members will
have appreciated given previous
exchanges the government won't be
extending the transition period and
date-palms is legislated to prevent
ministers from agreeing to such an
extension the government will therefore
continue to negotiate a new fair trade
deal with the EU the process which will
conclude by the end of December we go
over to Layla Barak I am wrong Thank You
mr. speaker
are you got poll released this weekend
shows that half the population now think
that transition period should be
extended versus 35% who think the
government should press ahead the public
know that kicking the economy when it's
down especially with a No Deal brexit on
top of a co bid crash is in no one's
best interests and he said just now that
there's a deal but he knows full well
that's the withdrawal agreement and not
the future deal that will determine the
trade relationship No Deal is still on
the table
so can the minister tell us will the
government even consider asking for a
short extension to avoid a No Deal
brexit or is it intent on putting
ideology before pragmatism no stay
I'm grateful to the Honorable lady for a
question this government always puts
pragmatism first in the interest of the
British people first as she mentioned a
YouGov poll there was another poll on
the 12th of December
last year called a general election and
which my right honourable friend the
member for Oxbridge and South rise that
secured a majority in order to take this
country out of the European Union on the
basis of the deal that he negotiated the
Liberal Democrats took part in that poll
I can't recall exactly how well they did
but it's certainly certainly the case
that they were not entrusted by the
British people with a discharge of
policy on our relationship with EU I
will local minister Smith to answer the
substantive question tabled by Virginia
Crosby mr. Smith thank you very much mr.
speaker
we've established a cabinet committee
structure to deal with the health
economic public sector and international
aspects of the coverage 19 impact
outbreak on behalf of the whole of the
UK ministers from the developed
administration's are regularly invited
to participate in these discussions and
do so to ensure the highest level of
coordination and effective working to
tackle this crisis on a uk-wide basis
across to Virginia across Spain mr.
speaker can I thank the minister and can
the minister assure me that the level of
cooperation will continue to ensure that
North Wales and honest Mourne are
equipped with enough PPE provision from
struggling care homes and vital testing
centers and can she assured me that
there will be UK wide approach to the
easing of restrictions and application
of the five tests
mr. Smith Thank You mr. speaker I'm
grateful for that question I hope I can
give her such reassurance I'm
particularly grateful of course to the
tone of administration's and in this
case the Welsh government for their
cooperation and we will continue to work
with them to respond to the pandemic and
that's in the interests of all of our
citizens we respect the competence of
the developed administration's in issues
like health and where appropriate we
will seek a Four Nations approach we
have a substantive question by Adam
Craig Minister mr. speaker mr. speaker
misleading information about coronavirus
whether it's maliciously intended or not
could cost lives so the work to tackle
false inform a
is there by our colleagues in the
Department for Culture and digital
cultural media and sports across all of
government we're also working closely
with social media platforms to help them
remove dangerous incorrect claims about
virus and promoting steps that everyone
can take to reduce the spread of false
information go across to Adam afraid
Adam right I will know who I will local
minister Massa who's going to take
question table by James Sunderland
Minister Mercer
with your permission mr. speaker I'll
take questions eighteen and nineteen
together as part of the National covert
19 response defence has supported NHS
Trust in a variety of ways we have
distributed PPE and diagnostic equipment
we supported the planning construction
staffing of Nightingale hospitals and
provided service personnel to conduct
testing at both regional and mobile
testing sites we established the Komen
support force to assist wider government
with 2935 personnel from that force as
of this morning currently deployed to
assist civil authorities James
Sunderland Thank You mr. speaker given
the challenging operational
circumstances in which key workers have
found themselves in recent weeks what
steps have been taken by the Cabinet
Office to recognize those who have gone
above and beyond the call of duty and
might indeed these steps manifest
themselves into a campaign medal
carefully considering the appropriate
way to reward and recognize those
involved in the unprecedented response
there will be a range of ways to mark
exceptional contributions once we're
through the crisis including
consideration of how the honor system
might pay a role des bombers continue to
consider existing internal mechanisms to
reward individuals and teams with the
recent example of captain Tom walk being
appointed as an honorary Colonel John
speller Thank You mr. speaker and I'm
sure we all agree that the military
bring a huge amount to our national
effort including manpower but much more
importantly mindset and their can-do
approach yet rather than use their
skills to the fool too many white all
departments are still clinging to the
old discredited ways involving layers of
middlemen questionable mega-mega
accounting and consulting firms and
needless delays for example the Foreign
Office put all their trust in the
airlines and left thousands of people
our people stranded abroad rather than
properly using the RAF planes and
equally are more importantly their
planning and chartering skills so as the
department responsible for procurement
policy will you get a grip not only to
get my constituents home but all and to
get kit to the NHS and to care homes but
also to ensure that we're much better
organized to come out of the lockdown
Minister my point of what I would say is
that whilst today you have seen the
military in the media and particularly
around testing and how we've stepped
into - up - to meet that challenge the
military's been evolving us from the
very beginning I mean we've mobilized
that 20,000 covert support force yes
we've got two and a half thousand people
at testing we've got 4,000 people
deployed at the moment is for other
government departments to choose when to
users we receive those denial signals
that that produces a response who are
only too happy to step up and help other
departments were requested I will no
call Minister penny Morton to answer the
substantive questions table by Angus
Brendan MacNeil
Minister Thank You mr. speaker
the Prime Minister established new
implementation committees to coordinate
the coded response the committee's are
supported by the Cabinet Office
Secretariat and meet regularly on all
issues including testing we now go
across to Angus Brenda MacNeil Angus
Brenda MacNeil topple over mr. speaker
day and can I say firstly how sorry we
are in Hiligaynon year to year the
concerning news former neighbor snail of
sky about the cove it out big in port 3
or to the Western with ourselves in the
healing in a year with an ideal area
really they were the lowest average to
pilot a test taste isolate and even more
so with the kind offers of help from the
world leaders in population testing
namely your neighbors and the Faroe
Islands so with that and if and when the
Scottish government green lights the
sensible pilot will the UK government
also assist by perhaps using RAF
training flights to take test samples on
the half hour flight from my last owner
we or Benbecula to the Faroe Islands and
they stand well I thank the Honourable
gentleman for that and indeed all
colleagues who have put forward ideas
and solutions and shared good practice
in the early weeks of this crisis I'm
sure the honourable gentleman's request
will have been heard by our joint
minister with the ministry of defence
and of course defences stepped up in
every case where they have been asked
and I am sure that they will do so to
support testing wherever it is taking
place and the pilots to minister
substantive question Christie Matheson
with your permission mr. Speaker I will
answer questions 21 and 20 together both
the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster
and the health secretary attend a daily
meeting with the Prime Minister testing
and tracing are part of those issues
which are considered in detail at that
meeting
Christian Matheson Thank You mr. speaker
is clear that testing and tracing and
cracking will be an essential part of
our battle against crow virus and it
will require Tech and IET to support
that there have been concerns last few
days about the allocation of contracts
for this and perhaps a bit of cronyism
within Downing Street so what safeguards
will the minister put in place to ensure
that applications and the date of the
year that those applications used will
be safeguarded and used solely for the
purposes of defeating coronavirus
Minister well I think the honourable
gentleman
his question clearly there are very
strict protocols which surround any kind
of procurement or any kind of pilot that
might take place across any government
department those have given us
confidence in the past and there is no
reason why they shouldn't in the future
I think if the Honorable gentleman has
concerns then he should raise them with
the relevant minister and certainly the
Cabinet Office but those protocols are
strong they've stood us in good stead we
have transparency around these issues
we now go across to Catherine McConnell
with a supplementary question Catherine
MacKinnon thank you I'm pleased the
government recognized the importance of
testing and tracing to containing the
virus it's just one of the issues that
we need to get right before we can
safely reopen schools had teachers in my
constituency are really struggling to
support vulnerable pupils particularly
with free school mountain vela school
free school meal vouchers because the
system used by the government's chosen
provider Eden red is just not fit for
purpose will the government urgently get
a grip on this to ensure that at least
our children get fed release time I
thank the Honourable lady for her
questions she is right that ensuring
that we have the right testing and the
right volume of testing in place is one
of those five criteria for us being able
to reopen society and ease lockdown
measures I know that there have been
issues with the voucher system that the
Department of Education has been looking
at if there are any remaining issues in
the Honorable lady's constituency if you
would like to flag them with me I will
take them up with the Department for
Education it is the end of the questions
we know concise statement I call the
Secretary of State for worker works and
pensions
to make a statement and the statement is
up to ten minutes
cigarettes a
to raise coffee thank you mister
speaking with your permission I will
make a statement updating the house on
the work of my department first of all I
want to pay tribute to the civil
servants in my department as well as our
contractors and partners who have been
working tirelessly to provide help and
support to those in need
they are the hidden heroes for many
people in this country and they should
take great pride in their hard work and
dedication to supporting people through
these difficult times since 16 March to
the end of April we have received over
1.8 million claims to universal credit
over 250,000 claims to Jobseeker's
Allowance and over 20,000 claims for
Employment Support Allowance
overall this is six times the volume
that we would typically experience and
in one week we had a tenfold increase
the rate for you see claims appears to
have stabilized at about twenty to
twenty-five thousand per day which is
double that of a standard week pre Kovac
19 I'm pleased that my department is
standing up to the challenge we have
redeployed a significant number of DWP
staff about 8,000 so far and from other
government departments about 500 so far
in order to process these claims our
payments harmless for universal credit
is running at a record high we've also
issued almost 700 thousand advances to
claimants who felt that they could not
wait for their first routine payments
and the masked majority of these
claimants receive money within 72 hours
where possible and mindful of risk we
have also streamlined our processes we
will consider carefully learnings from
this time in the response phase on
whether any of them can be made
permanent we've also sought to make it
possible for people to work from home
and have already deployed 10,000
computers we are now at a level of
deploying 750 new devices a day to
enable working from home and added to
the IT capacity for remote users however
where staff need to continue to work at
the office we are applying social
distancing making sure our claimants and
civil servants are safe is a key
priority from the 17th of March we
suspended all face-to-face assessments
for health and disability benefits we
automatically extended awards for
existing claimants that were due to be
reassessed by 3 months and will only
undertake reviews or reassessments when
claimants notify us of changes which
could lead to a higher payment any claim
made under the special
to terminal illness continues to be
fast-tracked fast-tracked taking an
average of sick day six days to process
these claims from March 24th job sensors
have not been open for regular
appointments but we have continued to
offer face-to-face appointments in
exceptional circumstances when claimants
would otherwise not to be able to
receive support claimants can continue
receive support over the phone or
through their online journals all local
job centers have been turned into
virtual processing teams prioritizing
advances and the registration and
payments of new claims we've also been
pairing job centers across the country
to support each other with processing
fully using the capacity of our network
this focus on the processing of claims
has also meant that we stop checking the
claimant commitment regarding looking
for and being available for work for
three months we do however want
claimants to continue to look for work
whether they're wherever they are able
to do so ministers are working hard to
ensure that existing vacancies can be
accessed by people who being made
unemployed and we will continue to
support those people while they are
waiting for the opportunity for work
we've created a new website to guide
people it's called job help W DWP gov
dot uk' and we have 50 8250 C's
advertised while our IT systems worked
our thanks to extensive work by the
universal credit team including our
contractors I know that some claimants
experience significant delays in
verifying their identity now identity
checks are crucial in reducing forward
risk so we work closely with the Cabinet
Office to substantially increase the
capacity of the online verify system an
average wait times on note now below 5
minutes call volumes have also been
extremely high with over 2.2 million
calls in one day at our peak recognizing
again the delays people are experiencing
or indeed not being able to get through
at all we turn this around with our
don't call us we'll call you campaign
the bolstered frontline team now
proactively calls claimants when we need
to check any information providers part
of the claim this has been very
successful in freeing up the capacity
and reducing the time customers need to
spend on the phone regarding other
operations to the department while we
have redeployed staff we've kept
critical work ongoing in child
maintenance and bereavement we are
monitoring our performance and we'll
turn
staff to these areas if the response
rate is unacceptable on pensions we have
canceled the pension levy increase
supported DC contribution through the
job retention scheme and worked with
regulators to assist DB pensions and
combat scams I think it's worth
reminding the house of our financial
injection over six and a half billion
pounds into the welfare system so it can
act as a safety net for the poorest in
society we focused on changes that could
be made quickly and would have
significant positive impact we have
increased the standard rate of Universal
Credit and working tax credit for the
next 12 months by around 1,000 pounds
per year we increase the local housing
allowance rates for universal credit and
housing benefit claimants so they now
cover the lowest 30 percent of local
rents we also increase the national
maximum caps so claimants Annina and
central London will also see should also
see an increase in their housing support
payments I've been made aware of an
issue that some councillors have not
made that adjustment in Housing Benefit
and my department is communicating to
them all this week furthermore across
England we had already increased the
discretionary housing payments by an
extra 40 million pounds for this
financial year the 1.7 percent benefit
uplift was implemented in April ending
the benefits freeze and the state
pension rose by three point nine percent
as per the triple lock reflecting last
year's substantial rise in average
earnings we've also introduced
regulations to ease access to benefits
we legislated to allow access to
employment support allowance from day
one of the claim we relaxed the minimum
income floor so the self-employed can
access universal credit more readily
we've also made it easier to access ESA
by launching our ESA portal for online
applications we legislated to ensure
employees had satury sick pay available
from day one of sickness or
self-isolation due to covered 19 remind
the house the satury sick pay is the
legal minimum we will continue to look
at issues that arise like we are
ensuring that maternity pay is based on
the standard pay not furlough pay levels
and see what we can do quickly and
straightforwardly to fix either
unintended consequences or unforeseen
issues but it is not my intention to
change the fundamental principles or
application of universal
it a significant project we have
undertaken is to support MH CLG and the
national shielding service by
establishing the outbound contact center
furthermore we use this contact sector
to proactively contact our most
vulnerable cost customers who receive
their benefits or pension solely through
post office card accounts I want to
thank the post office in helping us
support this group of customers and
we've been able to provide contact free
cash payments by Royal Mail special
delivery and we were also able to
signpost people to extra support from
their local counsel I can also inform
the house today that DWP will stop any
new benefit and Pension claimants from
using the post office card account from
the 11th of May as we prepare for the
end of this contract uptake of accounts
in the last year has been exceptionally
low but in any event given that the vast
majority of people using pocket already
we believe already have a bank account
the cost of the contract is poor value
for taxpayers current customers who
currently receive payment through a post
office card account will see no change
and will continue to receive payments
into their accounts for the remainder of
the contract period we can use the HMG
payment exception service for people who
cannot access any bank account I also
want to thank the Health and Safety
Executive for their work on covert 19
which is an arm's length body for Great
Britain and is sponsored by the by my
department they have been doing crucial
work with the Department for business
energy and industrial strategy and
public health England to provide
guidelines for employers to hear - once
restrictions can begin to be eased the
HSE is working hard along with local
authorities to enable work to continue
safely in the sectors for which they are
responsible they've developed practical
guidance on enforcing the law where
workers are being exposed to unnecessary
risk in conclusion mr. speaker my
department is standing up to the
challenge of unprecedented demand for
our services and we are getting support
to those who need it we will continue to
work across government to help the
nation get through this health emergency
and I commend this statement to the
house
I know call Jonathan Reynolds who is
five minutes something Reynolds Thank
You mr. speaker
can I thank the Secretary of State for
advance notice of this statement today
my thanks to the
educated frontline staff of the
Department for Work and Pensions
everything they have done and are doing
during this crisis to make sure we can
process the unprecedented volume of
claims that have been made I also want
to make clear that I welcome the
measures the Secretary of State has
announced so far the Social Security
system we had going into this crisis was
a safety net with too many holes in it
and is good that the government
themselves have recognized this the
questions I have for the Secretary of
State today about how we can widen this
net so that everyone who needs support
gets it and about the steps that will
need to be taken as we move from
response to recovery firstly the
government how significantly increased
univers people on legacy benefits such
as job seekers allowance and Employment
Support Allowance have not seen a
corresponding increase in their benefit
over 100 charities have pointed out that
this discriminates against disabled
people in particular when will these
benefits be operated secondly there are
now a hundred thousand families who
won't be able to receive this increase
because they are still limited by the
benefit cap let's say the benefit cap
exists to force people to work more
hours or move to cheaper housing both of
daily impossible during the crisis
almost every organization from the
Institute for Fiscal Studies and the
residue foundation to the child poverty
Action Group believes it should be
temporarily does the Secretary of State
thirdly and you all who has been saving
for housing deposit or for a rainy day
or for a substantial item could find
themselves ineligible for universal
credit because of those savings those
people paid into the system when they
were in work
shouldn't it be there for them now I
don't believe we should punish these
savers and I believe these saving of it
should also be suspended fourthly the
government says the two-child limit
exists so people supported by Social
Security have to make the same family
choices as those who are but this crisis
shows how absurd that claim is people
three years ago could not have been
expected to make family choices based on
the likelihood of a global pandemic
shutting down our economy you government
how suspended sanctions during the
crisis but the to child will it's
effectively and
teen years time on the third and fourth
child in a family and surely it should
go to
fifthly and finally those people who are
eligible for support from universal
credit will still have to wait five
weeks for money or taken advance that
will then be deducted from future
payments but what many people don't
appreciate is if you clear the universal
credit before you save your final
Salamone income means you you have
entitlement for your first month and
effectively could have to wait as long
as nine weeks for any boost a 5 week
weight has been a single biggest driver
of housing arrears short-term debt and
food bank use in the country it should
not exist at all but in the crisis it is
particularly egregious and it simply
must go grocery is a very specific issue
with the Secretary of State it has come
to light that the universal credit
regulations treatment energy allowance
which is received by mainly low paid
women as unearned income statutory
maternity pay as earnings which are
disregarded by the work allowance and
this could result in a low paid pregnant
woman being as much as four thousand
pounds a year worse off why is this
humble it change Tony - preparations for
the recovery can I ask the Secretary of
State as the cabinet minister
responsible for the health and safety
what conversations she's had with them
about the process by which workplaces
will be made safe when people are asked
to return to work with a lock-down began
most enemies were inundated with
questions from constituents stealing
work asking if their workplace sounded
safe and that simply will do or in
lockdown ends there must be a clear
process agreed by the workforce and
management not least because to fail to
do so would likely result in significant
litigation finally mr. speaker this
crisis has can refer terms what the UK's
are equal an unfair labor market really
means while some people have been able
to work from home and full pay others
have faced having to go into work and
risk their health or have lost their
jobs through no fault of their own and
receive Social Security or sick pay set
at just a fifth of the UK's weekly
median Inc the four million British
children grow up in poverty
living in poor accommodation perhaps
without the internet connections many of
us take for granted the lockdown will
have a severe impact on their well-being
many of likened our response to
coronavirus to fighting a wall
if that is true then the aftermath
should be equally so with a renewed
national effort to fight the inequality
poverty and insecurity they should have
no place in this country at any time
Thank You mr. speaker
Secretary of State well I'd like to
thank the Honorable gentleman actually
welcome to his position we are in an
unusual place today literally as the
Honorable gentleman is appearing
virtually for our first exchange as a
statement but we will be seeing each
other again next Monday when we come to
questions I'm in answer to some of his
his several of his questions so I think
in terms of the legacy benefits now I
should stress that the increase to
working tax credits and universal credit
is only temporary until twelve months
from when it was applied there are two
things here one is quite literally we
have a digital UC system it's and the
working tax credit system I understand
is digital it is far more
straightforward and was quick to be able
to change that our older systems the
legacy benefit systems are it would take
I understand quite some time and I'm
talking about several months to get this
to change in the process that we have
that's indicative if I can giving you an
analogy of when we make the changes to
benefits that tends to happen about four
or five months before the actual changes
come through because that is how long it
takes our computer systems to work I
think there's a second point the
statutory sick pay weekly rate is about
ninety five pounds the change to
universal credit is about ninety four
pounds we are seeing initially at this
for the first time people feel we only
anticipate and hope people will be on
universal credit for actually quite a
short amount of time while we go through
this significant emergency and to that
end it was as I point out
straightforward to change that now there
are other benefits people or other
things that people would benefit from
and that would include some of the work
that we've been doing
things like mortgage holidays also
stopping evictions happening from people
are renting due to issues connected to
covert 19 as well as things like people
who on prepayment for electricity again
no supply no utilities pliers going to
restrict any supply due to issues at
this time in terms of the benefit cap I
did say during this statement that it's
not the intention to change
fundamentally the process or the
principles or application in the
universal credit I am conscious of the
benefit cap that we are still talking
outside London an income potentially of
twenty thousand pounds over the year
being a given to people it's a benefits
claimants or twenty three thousand
pounds in London unconscious that that
could be something like a 25 to 30,000
pounds sort of a take-home salary
effectively after you took into account
taxation and similar so I do think it is
not necessary right now to be changing
it's not not necessary to be changing
the benefit cap I think what I do want
to point out to the on velentin though
is that claimants may benefit from a
nine month grace period where the
universal credit will not be capped if
they have a sustained work record in
terms of the savings threshold the
saving threshold where there's no
Universal Credit eligibility at all is
when people have savings of sixteen
thousand pounds
now the universe of credit is designed
to really help the poorest in society I
am conscious again if any changes were
contemplated it would have taken some
time to process that but we have decided
to focus our efforts on those who are
poorest in society I should also say mr.
speaker that the if people have like
self-employed people have saved money
for taxation payments and they are
effectively going to be treated as
business assets so they would not be
included in the consideration of all
would be deemed personal savings in
terms of the five week wait as has been
pointed out again there is no tension to
change that in fact this is our biggest
week in terms of the largest number of
people who claimed this would be our
biggest payment week going ahead I am
aware of what the honourable gentleman
says
people who've got paid in the last month
so there is a phasing issue in terms of
the calculation of universal credit
payments that people would be entitled
to in regards to the standard allowance
as my understanding and I do know that's
a fading issue and it is one of the
benefits of having the advanced which is
they're designed to actually spread a
kind of an annual income over thirteen
payments instead of twelve so for people
who are going through that right now
that would be my recommendation that
they should consider getting that
advance and like as I say that the the
total annual payment would be spread
over the year in terms of you see
regulations in terms of maternity
allowance and statutory minimum pay
maternity pay I will look into that for
the Honorable gentleman I will write to
him on it I do know that quite a lot of
consideration has been given to the
different rates supporting those people
in Maternity but I will write to him
with that in terms of the aspects of
people only receiving statutory sick pay
I'd point out to the house that that is
a legal minimum but it is one of the
purposes of the furlough scheme that
people were instead of either being made
unemployed or or other elements that
there was this opportunity and of course
so if people are sick then an employers
entitled to do the start free sick pay
and I should also point out in terms of
those people who have been shielded and
cannot go to work and can't work from
home then the furlough scheme can be
applied straight away for the for them
and we are encouraging employers to do
so we now go over to else great with Rob
Butler Butler Thank You mr. speaker the
extraordinary level of support my right
honourable friend has described is
certainly welcome in the Aylesbury
constituency and is undoubtedly
assisting thousands of households and
and I join in paying tribute to all the
staff both in the in the department and
in job centre classes in making that
it would be helpful if my right
honorable friends could perhaps describe
the ways in which these unprecedented
levels of support from DWP can help the
owner directors of small limited
companies many of whom have have written
to me because they're mainly paid by
dividends and so they're not entitled to
the assistance scheme for self-employed
I think it's fair to be clear these are
not multimillionaires these are
hardworking hairdressers and makeup
artists or decorators and electricians
they've lost their income and they'd
really welcome my ride from reference
assistants great state well my favorite
mono boyfriend he's right to speak up
for the people he represents especially
as small business owners who have set up
their companies in particular ways I'm
sure well advised by accountants at the
time on an optimal way to do that it is
fair to say that the self-employed
income puts Income Support Scheme is
expected to cover 95% of people who
receive the majority of their income
from self-employment and but if not then
I was recommend that those other people
do look online at their potential
eligibility for universal credit we have
removed the minimum income flaw that's
an assumed level of income in universal
credit when it comes to self-employed
people so that should no longer be
considered when trying to calculate the
benefits on which they for which they
may be eligible
I know call Neil Gray who's got two
minutes
Neil Gray thank you thank you very much
mr. speaker and to the Secretary of
State for advanced site of her statement
I wish to be on record my thanks to the
DWP staff who are continuing to work
hard to deliver Social Security benefits
as quickly as possible in very difficult
circumstances but the circumstances have
been made more difficult by the
decisions of the UK government by
introducing bureaucratic support schemes
instead of a far simpler Universal basic
payment with a longer view towards
universal basic income millions have
been forced onto a still inadequate
universal credit and despite DBP staff
being moved to cope with you see demand
over 200,000 people will have the you
see claim paid late according to the UK
government's best estimates because DWP
staff have been
to help process you see claims MPs and
other advice organizations are not
getting casework inquiries answered in
the normal way which is also causing
unfair hardship on the last day that I
contributed in this house in the 18th of
March before lockdown I said people need
help now and hours not days and yet the
people applying for universal credit
that week will have only just received
their first payment a few days ago the
British government must finally stop the
five-week wait they've claimed they
can't solve it by making the advanced
payment system a grant rather than a
loan because of vulnerability to fraud
so why not make the advance a grant when
the applicant is confirmed as eligible
for universal credit
I would appreciate proper consideration
of this proposal every food bank in my
constituency has reported a 47 percent
increase in demand for their services
since their onset of Corbett 19 that
should focus minds and the prime
minister said that nobody would get left
behind
so why is there not been an uplift and
legacy benefits like ESA as there has
been to Universal Credit and finally
well describe that a model poverty
inducing to child limit bedroom tax and
benefit cap and will they operate all
benefits to make up for the years of
cuts that came via the benefit freeze
1.7 percent just doesn't come close
Secretary of State well I think the
Honourable gentleman for his questions
in terms of bureaucratic schemes I
actually think government has worked at
Pace to introduce brand-new schemes in
order to protect people rights across
the country we've seen the success of
the job retention scheme we've seen that
the self-employed scheme is underway and
again consider if conserve Lexx ability
has been put into that system to help
people who may not have had three years
of earnings to give them time to submit
their latest tax return promptly to get
support in terms of universal basic
income as a variety of analysis into
this I think the latest report I saw
estimated it would cost over 400 billion
pounds a year it is not targeted at the
poorest in society I think it's not an
appropriate way for us to
try and distribute money instead a
schemes are focused on making sure that
the poorest do get help in terms of the
DWP staff being moved from department to
Department as I say we have made sure
that we are monitoring performances and
where there are increases in how long
it's taken to process certain kinds of
payments I've made it clear to my
officials that we then need to move
people back we are in this key kind of
peak of payments this week for the
people who where we have the largest
that take or of applications and I'm
confident that we will get through that
again with at least 90% if not even
higher of people getting their payments
on time in terms of I've already
answered the question about the legacy
benefits why they haven't increased in
terms of making an advance a grant well
it comes back to the idea and the
principle mr. speaker that getting in
advance is effectively means you have 13
payments in a year instead of 12 to
cover the annual allocation to which
you're entitled seven hundred and thirty
thousand people have received sorry
nearly seven hundred thousand people
have received in advance and while
nearly 1.8 million people have not have
applied for universal credit and those
others have not sought to have an
advance it would not actually be even
fair to the other new claimants if one
group of people got more money than they
did simply because they'd apply it for
an advance in terms of increase in food
banks I'm aware of the extensive work
that is going across government in fact
my honourable friend from Colchester is
involved in the task force about helping
the vulnerable people I'm conscious of
the increase in food bank usage and the
excellent work that's going on with my
honourable friend from Bambury about as
well as can borne and turned from the
other side of his Red Roof Inn in making
sure that we can work with
in order to make sure that food can get
to people our most vulnerable in society
but I would also point out and recognize
the increase in the food pantry usage
but we've had a six-fold increase in the
number of people claiming universal
credit and we are making sure we get our
money to them no go over to Deanna
Davison do you know Davison Thank You
mr. speaker and may I find the Secretary
of State for her statement and join my
colleagues in paying tribute to be
excellently WP staff we've been working
you know unprecedented hours really to
try and help get the supports people in
our country that need it but this impact
of coronavirus means that more people in
Bishop Auckland and right across the
country have been applying for universal
credit so what steps is my right
underwater I'm taking to ensure that new
claimants in Bishop organ am being
received SS payments directly well
tomorrow so more free time I love a
friendly and UC approach remains the
same we make an assessment of people's
incomes and for those people who are
already on universal credit they'll have
seen when their income fell
substantially that their Universal
Credit payment would have increased as a
result of that so it is working for new
claimants again once they've got through
that initial claim which is straight for
what I appreciate there were
difficulties early on and getting online
verification identity verification but
the process should be very smooth now
and for those people who have not got
cannot make ends meet than the advanced
option is there and people can get that
money very quickly no go over to Steve
Antin Stephen Turner's Thank You mr.
speaker I joined the Secretary of State
and others in commending the Department
staff for handling the recent surge and
I also welcome higher Universal Credit
working Tax Credit local housing irons
and it stands from her earlier answer as
if the Secretary of State agrees that
job seekers allowance and Employment
Support Allowance
should have been increased as well it's
unfair that they haven't been the
unchanged benefit cap is now blocking
increased support which the government
has decided people should receive it's
having a particular effect in London it
could be increased so
will the government now be more
consistent in supporting people's extra
costs during this crisis serious thing
well I should point out to the right
honourable gentleman and that in terms
of trying to make a short-term increase
this was gone through with the Treasury
on how we could do this quickly and the
quickest ways were to increase the local
housing allowance and also universal
credit rather than other benefits as
I've referred to in terms of the
situation in London unconscious that
aspects of Housing Benefit regulations
did go through a month ago but not all
councils have applied them and the way
that we have done something with the
kind of thresholds means that people in
London should be able to see an increase
in the amount of money that they get
when it comes to housing support but
otherwise mr. speaker it's not the
intention of the government to change
the benefit cap in its and its current
threshold we go over to Peter bol Peter
Berg mr. speaker can I follow on from my
honourable friend from elsewhere its
point about directors of small companies
the government's done very well to
protect people on PA Yee and also done
very well to protect people who are
self-employed but directors of small
companies fall through the cracks and it
really isn't good enough just to say
well they can fall back on universal
credit may cases they won't qualify
anyway and we protected other sectors so
can you say I really think we must do
better and we must sort out how we're
going to protect the directors of small
companies okay well I think to my other
friends who will know having been an
accountant that there will be variety of
people who receive dividends potentially
from a company and it's not currently
possible for the HMRC to know whether
somebody has given this themselves in
lieu of a salary or whether it's a
payment to an investor so it's a
different situation where people have
chosen to finance their
income from the business in that way and
he'll be aware that I think I'm right in
saying the rate of tax on paying
dividends is seven and a half percent
once you go above the dividends
allowance there is quite a difference in
how people who would do a self-employed
through a normal pa y scheme would again
pay aspects of national insurance and
tax directly as it directly so I think
that the Treasury in devising the scheme
has sought to try and identify as many
people as possible it could help and by
achieving that with 95 percent of
self-employed in people I think that's a
pretty good outcome stinking far a steep
Thank You mr. speaker
there is a growing support for a
recovery universal basic income and it
is being a centered in other parts of
the world and they would dispute what
the sector state has already said around
the costings of stress to her as well
that this can't be supported through
wider changes to the taxation system so
give them the current cliff edge on the
job retention skin the teenager of class
redundancies pressures on universal
credits plus the need to inject spending
and the economy to kick-start recovery
well the second is save at least early
work with the Treasury should explore
this option mistake no I won't mr.
speaker I've already set out why don't
think universal basic income is the
right approach however my noble friend
is a member for Northern Ireland he'll
be aware that welfare is actually
transferred to Northern Ireland's so he
if he wanted to lobby the executive
there they might be able to devise a
scheme that they think is more
appropriate locally Chris Grayling going
over to Chris Grayling Thank You mr.
speaker but I also join in thanking all
the staff at the DWP and indeed the
secretary state and her team
particularly mr. depth and Job Center
for dealing with the current crisis as
effectively as they have could I ask my
right honourable friend to look again at
the issue orb local housing allowance
for the areas immediately outside London
there are some anomalies particularly
affecting my own Christian CNET Samuel
but of course there will be a greater
need for housing support could she look
at the level of support to make sure it
really is related to the local rental
market
well the local housing allowance is done
on certain housing areas and this was a
significant change act that the
Chancellor announced in order to bring
this up to the 30th percentile what I
would say to my honorable friend is that
councils across the country have been
receiving discretionary housing payments
this is separate to the hardship fund
mr. speaker this was ongoing and we
added 40 million pounds to that for this
financial year prior to this situation
so I would encourage anybody who is and
are still struggling in his local area
to go directly to the council for some
support we go over to Barbara Keeley
Barbara Keeley Thank You mr. speaker
during this crisis the government has
rightly stopped recovering overpayments
from the Universal Credit recipients but
they are still diamond we need the five
week wait to be scrapped so that people
don't need advance payments but can the
Secretary of State also confirmed today
that the government will defer any
recovery of advance payments until after
this crisis has passed
well the way that advance payments are
recovered mr. speaker is by as I say
treating this in effect as a phasing
issue so that people have 13 payments
every year instead of 12 so as a
consequence elements will be removed
from the following 12 payments so that
the annual total would be the same going
over 200 in Patterson Oh in Patterson
Thank You mr. speaker can I begin by
heartily congratulating the Secretary of
State
all the staff at the DWP for the
astonishing achievement of handling 1.8
million applicants for universal credit
and clearing 1 million could I just draw
her attention to those people many of
them self-employed who were on working
tax credits and were encouraged by the
government to apply for universal credit
not knowing that the moment they applied
for universal credit they ultimately
lost by law working tax credit they now
find some of them because they've been
prudence they'd set aside money for
pensions they had savings that they
don't qualify under current rules for
universal credit and they can't go
and claim for working tax trades now
I've had lettuce on her Department
talking about new style Employment
Support Allowance and the new
self-employment input income supports
being which are very welcome could she
go back to those people and make it
clear that they have the right to apply
for these because many of them are not
accustomed to dealing with the benefit
system and they only went through this
process under government encouragement
day so first of all I'd like to thank my
handsome boyfriend for praising a south
of the DWP and he's right to do so and I
thank him for that I'm very aware of the
issue he's bringing to my attention and
I am actively looking at that particular
scenario where people not realizing some
of the eligibility rules have there made
the application and we are no longer
effectively going to receive working tax
credits I cannot give an answer to my
honourable friend or the House today but
I can assure him I'm looking very
carefully into what potential changes we
could do to address that situation and
I've already asked for the website to be
updated so people are crystal clear when
they apply we know the - we're a
Hobhouse we're about Thank You mr.
speaker and may I also thank you for
that very hard work mr. speaker the
hospitality arts in tourism sector which
are vital industries in my constituency
and bath will not recover overnight even
when the restrictions are lifted many of
my constituency constituents will have
no options but to go on universal credit
with no job prospects any time soon does
the minister think and she has been even
am referring company directors for their
eligibility of the Universal Credit does
she think that the current universal
credit allowance of just under five
thousand pounds per year for the over
25s is enough to live a dignified life
on baby
well Thank You mr. speaker in regards to
the hospitality hospitality and tourism
sector she aware of the generous
approach taken by the government in
regards to whether it be grants
the furlough scheme as well as other
reliefs that are being applied in terms
of the figure that she quotes that is
solely the standard allowance mr.
speaker there are other elements of
universal credit for which people may be
entitled whether that's whether they
have children whether they have housing
costs so it is the rolling up of six
benefits into one she only focuses on
one and that equates currently to about
95 pounds per week and I think that 94
points per week and I think that is a
reasonable assumption regardless of all
the other costs disregarding the other
costs still Anderson Stuart Anderson
Thank You mr. speaker
I do recognize the exceptional work that
the DWP is doing at this time what I
also want to applaud the work everybody
in Wolverhampton is doing from following
the government guidance to caring for
loved ones what plans does my right
honorable friend have to provide support
for people who have informal carers who
are having to shield themselves during
the kovat pandemic well my honourable
friend is right to praise people who
have been undertaking this it role and
my department's has introduced two
important temporary measures to
recognize changes to care and during the
current emergency first of all and paid
carers will be able to continue to claim
carers allowance if they have a
temporary break in caring because the
bay or the person they care for gets
coronavirus or have to isolate because
of it and also we've made sure that
rather than just more traditional forms
of care that providing emotional support
to a disabled person will also now count
towards the carers allowance threshold
of 35 hours of care of week and this
recognises that the nature of caring
might have to change during the current
emergency we now go over to a virtual
Jim Shannon Jim Shannon Thank You mr.
speaker it's always a pleasure to to ask
a question and I thank the minister and
particular for all her energy on
commitment and responses to the
questions so far and also thank the DWP
staff in across United Kingdom of Great
Britain and northern Italy Strangford
you've done a whole
to help people minister you've referred
to self-employed directors in
hospitality and retail and fishing and
construction bus companies they invest
their profit back into their companies
as well as as self-employed directors
many of these are family businesses
creating many jobs in the high street so
I'm gonna serve can I ask again if you
don't mind just exactly what can be done
to help the self-employed directors and
and shops across a whole get knowledge
comfort well enhance in feed our
villages across the coast Italy and
Strangford thank you very much sir stay
well mr. speaker could see my little
friend doing well over in Northern
Ireland I do want to stress again that
the scheme that was established by the
Treasury will cover about 95 percent of
people who receive a majority of their
income from self-employment and I've
tried to share with the house some of
the approach taken in order to support
people who do only pay themselves in
effect by dividends that's as I pointed
out to the house earlier is a small
percentage of people who get the
majority of their income that way and
which then effect they only pay 7 5% tax
now I'm conscious that dividends can not
be decided where they're solely for
effectively substitute pay or whether
they are for a return on investment but
I would encourage them to consider other
forms of support that may be available
at this time
we go to Jessa McCartney Joseph McCarthy
Thank You mr. speaker can I also join
the acknowledgement for all the staff at
the DWP who have processed 1.8 million
universal credit applications it really
has been a superb effort and also
acknowledge all the support financial
support the Treasury had brought forward
including the bounced back loans today
the warmer right honourable friend as
she has just said to other members
please please please look at what
can be done to support self-employed
limited company directors and can I also
add those as well that are freelancers
and also those that started a new job in
March and therefore can't be furloughed
there are other groups that need extra
support please Segura stay well mr.
speaker several of those people who are
seeking support may well be able to get
support through Universal Credit I'm
conscious of the design of the furlough
scheme and the self-employed scheme does
not address every single worker in this
country or self-employed person I know
that the Treasury worked at pace in
order to get those schemes established
and they do cover the absolute vast
majority of people who are now seeking
support go across to and the Hobbit
em'ly holiday Thank You mr. speaker last
week I was contacted by a constituent
who has a heart condition
he's also a mobile because of a problem
with his spine and he's had a liver
transplant he applied for pip in October
2019 and has still not had a reply when
I contacted the DWP I was told that
because of co bid 19 it would be delays
in responding to me but as I said this
application was from October now I'm
sure the minister agrees that this is
unacceptable
so what is she actually going to do to
ensure that benefits are processed on a
reasonable timeframe so guru steady
well anoint of what sir been happening
we have tried to streamline the process
so I don't know the details of the
individual case to which the Honourable
lady refers and I'm sure that my older
friendly Minister would be happy to look
into that detailed situation so I don't
know if or no assessment had been made
at all or if it was a case of the
outcome was being contested but I do
want to make sure that we are not
ignoring situations and new claims are
still being processed and but I accept
that there may be people who we need to
follow up on and I'd be happy to do
third my honorable friends to do that on
her behalf go across to Laura throught
Laura trot
Thank You mr. speaker despite the
enormous amount of support being given
to business many
people are newly unemployed what steps
are being taken to highlight to them job
opportunities in growing sectors of the
economy Hey
well Mr Speaker I am pleased that we've
relaunched in a way the or added to the
jobs websites on DWP gov dot uk'
there are about 58,000 a vacancy is
currently advertised on there but I'm
very supportive of all the work that has
gone on by my right honorable friend and
department for education on the things
like the extra work that's happening on
how people could get new skills whether
that's the courses that have been made
available online so there are
opportunities to consider upskilling
while people are sadly not working and
they can also speak to their work
coaches about our potential further
assistance as well try pepper Thank You
mr. speaker it cannot be fair that
families on the benefit cap are not
benefiting from the operating of
payments that have happened during this
crisis the resolution foundation has
predicted that a couple with two
children and an average three-bedroom
house in over two-thirds of local
authority areas will it be affected by
the cap we know that code 19 is going to
affect poorer families greater than
other sections of the server community
isn't it time that we move that benefit
cap to stop this situation getting worse
through state misses because I've
already said to the house there may be
kind of the maybe claimants you've been
it could benefit from a nine month grace
period where they're universal credit
will not be capped if they have a
sustained work record in regards to
other raises that have happened in terms
of housing there are some changes which
have been made which should help people
particularly in central and Outer London
but in general the principle is not to
remove the benefit cap go across to who
goober eben blueberry man Thank You mr.
speaker
we rightly hail all of our health
workers for the amazing job they're
doing it's good this afternoon that
we're hearing praise the DWP staff Adani
Bexhill and hastings they've been
absolutely amazing as they have been
across the country what I ask my office
what cases we had outstanding the answer
was zero but I asked how the performance
level rated I was told better than ever
so on that basis with the same
to a state look to see perhaps if
there's more discretion that we're using
now that can be used in the future
obviously we have to keep a cost control
mindset and commonality of
decision-making but it seems there are
positive lessons that can be learned and
can I thank her and her team for
everything they've done Bruce Feiler
well it's kind of my accountable friend
to thank DWP I think they deserve
universally credit mr. speaker but there
is a situation where we are trying to
learn from the streamlining that we have
done about potential permanent future
changes in order to see the enhanced
processing that we've been successfully
undertaking over the last few weeks
across to Beth winter Beth winter Thank
You mr. speaker many of my constituents
in carnevale suffered financial hardship
and poverty
prior to Corbett 19 striking with delays
in universal credit the process and of
PIP applications the child benefit car
from low wages and in secured employment
this has been multiplied by the corona
virus with communities individuals and
businesses seriously affected our local
Citizens Advice Bureau has been
inundated with welfare benefit queries
and I found them a no local agencies for
their hard work it is now time that the
government begins to face the financial
realities and hardship of people's lives
with the minister please agree to
consider introducing a recovery
universal basic income to help achieve
sustained economic recovery and which
could become the foundation for a future
Social Security system that provides
financial security for everyone
so let's take know we now go across to
mark palsy Bob palsy Thank You mr.
speaker mr. speaker rebbe Jobcentre Plus
was one of the first to go to full
service Universal Credit and the staff
there have been providing support to
their colleagues in other offices very
important at the time when registrations
are running at six times their usual
level I know the Secretary of State will
join me in thanking all of the staff for
their hard work to make certain that the
system run smooth if they wouldn't if I
could ask her what her assessment is of
what might have happened if we hadn't I
the tough decision is to modernize and
streamline the welfare system um we were
still operating under the highly
complicated legacy system so who state
well Mr Speaker I have to say this some
unkind words I wonder if Brian table
friends are seeking his pension judging
by his new attack however mr. speaker
the he asks a serious question which
serve a serious answer the reality is
and I've been told this by my senior
officials there is no way that the
historic legacy benefit system would
have been an in any way able to cope
with a situation that we have had the
move to Universal Credit has been
successful and we would still want to
make sure it rolls out universally but I
think those it has shown that it has
absolutely stood the biggest test of all
across to become a ha
thank you mr. speaker mr. speaker small
increases in universal kids at 11 C's
are not enough particularly because many
people will lose that up-left due to the
benefit cap now I appreciate the
Secretary of State has noted in previous
answers that she sees no need to remove
the benefit cap I'm seeing the need for
it and my conception C of eastern bar
concern so I should have view that
secession and finally left the benefit
cap so people will actually receive the
temp Yankees and support this so
desperately needs Sakura state we would
not be changing the benefit cabinet we
go across to Gary summed up Gary Sandra
Thank You mr. speaker can I thank the
Secretary of State for visiting with me
back in March to Longbridge table center
we both saw firsthand but work coaches
do a fantastic job supporting people
into employment but their ability to
meet with people in person is quite
rightly being restricted due to the
lockdown can my right honourable friend
update the house on the support being
given to work coaches so that it
continues to provide the support to
claimants despite these restrictions so
estate well mr. speaker what coaches a
lot have been deployed into almost
acting is processing the claims as well
as the relationship with claimants both
these things are critical to make sure
that the 1.8 million people can get paid
on time and they deserve tribute to that
I think as we get over this peak we'll
be able to start to see some other work
that
work coaches will resume with their
claimants Jessica mordant 82000 new
claims for universal credit in Wales
which is unprecedented and I encode the
thanks to DWP star but some still are
struggling to get support with their new
claims like the Constituent of couldn't
get you on the phone that walk 45
minutes to get help as she can't afford
internet taxes welcome I urge the
minister to do more to make it much
easier to access support with new claims
including and in the five week way so no
stake for mr. speaker were not intending
to end the five week wait where and
that's where advances can come in to
help the Honourable lady is right to
point out the difficulties people had
with telephony we've turned that system
around so now it should be more
straightforward as DWP calls claimants
romney other way around
Thank You mr. speaker and can I join
with colleagues in thanking the staff of
the DWP and in particular those in West
Worcestershire who've worked so hard
throughout this crisis she's been asked
a number of times about the universal
basic income and has resolutely rejected
it can she confirmed that a universal
basic income would have to be paid
universally to everybody and that would
include people like ourselves a roof
stay well my honourable friend is
absolutely right and that's why we know
it is not a well targeted system so that
is why we will continue to say that is
not the approach that this government
will take and she is it possible she had
this his confidence and his continued
the five universal to child policy and
benefits a guru state well the
fundamentals of the Universal Credit do
not change and the reason why there is
an assessment period is to understand
people's general incomes and make a
basis from that but this is where the
advances come in to help for people who
cannot make ends meet in between as I
say fewer than half of people who have
applied for universal credit have also
wanted an advance I think that shows
that given that we're getting the vast
majority of that money to people within
three days that the system is flexible
enough to help those who need it most
go across to a little Granger in little
Granger Thank You mr. speaker the
Secretary of State has made it very
clear how the system is working it is
working well but I wonder the second
stay go take a chance to perhaps to
address some of the issues to it
self-employed people who are still
waiting for money from the announcement
and perhaps reiterate some of the rules
and also the way they're going to be
paid over the next few months I think it
will be useful and helpful to let people
understand just what the government is
doing to make sure they are looked after
and paid for the long term stay well my
honorable friend will be aware that 80%
of people's profits are going to be
reimbursed to self-employed people
through the form of a grant I know that
the system is going to take some time to
deliver my understanding is that
payments will start to be paid within a
month but in the meantime there may be
people who are currently self-employed
who could seek support from universal
credit in between we go across to
mcLaughlin I'm mcLaughlin Mr Speaker I
was horrified to discover that contrary
to the announcement the recipients would
be entitled to a three-month extension
my conception a long parent with severe
mental health problems will not be why
because as the pep hotline confirm to my
caseworker if your award was decided by
a tribunal in other words if you were
forced to fight the DWP for that
lifeline not in that entitlement you
will again be treated differently to all
other pet recipients and the three
months safeguards won't
to you and this seriously be true and
I've saw Y zero state well if I set out
as a speaker for people who were due to
have a reassessment that is where the
situation would arise where we're going
to extend the award automatically by
just three months people who are in a
tribunal process of those who have
challenged the decisions and therefore
the question of what a war they have
received will be the one that is under
debate and review go across the
Christian weight loss of loved ones in
many families across the UK my friend
tell me what steps have been taken to
ensure widows widowers and their
families are being supported and what
improvements are being made to
bereavement benefits for widows and
widowers so estate bereavement support
payments does support working age people
who lose a spouse or civil partner after
the six of April 2017 by contributing to
the more immediate additional costs
associated bereavement and people
without children get an initial payment
of two and a half thousand pounds and a
teen subsequently monthly payments of
hundred pounds those with children
receive an initial payment three and a
half thousand pounds and 18 subsequent
payments of 350 pounds bereavement
support payment is not taxable and the
least well-off will gain the most as
they receive the payments in full
alongside any other benefits
entitlements go kloster done Jarvis done
Jarvis Thank You mr. speaker
mental and physical health conditions
should not be a barrier to finding work
and that's why working with the
Department for Work and Pensions we
launched working win an employment
program that has now helped 3,000 people
across South Yorkshire so canasta
secular state if she recognizes the
value of programs like working when and
will she commit to providing funding to
support our most vulnerable workers
through the kovat 19 crisis donor
statement or mr. speaker the department
supports a number of different schemes
around the country I'm not aware of the
one to which the Honourable gentleman
specifically refers and these will
continue I'm sure to be supported more
broadly
but each and every one will be evaluated
because we need to make sure that the
money that we do have has the further
best reach and I'm sure that he will
continue to lobby for that case in South
Yorkshire go across to Antony
Higginbotham in Lancashire I'm to the
Hagenbach Thank You mr. speaker it's
clear that we're all remains confusion
about who can and cannot go to work and
I receive questions every day about
whether any given company is essential
and if it isn't whether it should be
closed
come on therefore ask my right or my
friend what steps she is taken to meet
the current guidance clear and any
future guidance and make a suggestion
that some kind of public information
campaign is considered they my honorable
friend is right to raise this our policy
of communication has been very effective
about staying at home but we've also
said from the very start that people
should try to work from home but if they
cannot then they should go to work or
able to go to work but further advice
will be coming from government in the
coming weeks to employers and trade
unions on how to make workplaces safer
we have set out how work must be done in
the workplace including tailored advice
for different scenarios as an example of
how social distancing and other measures
might be implemented by employers to
help protect their workforce and
customers and we continue to learn from
each other including in this house
considering she relaxed the savings
there's many people losing their
businesses are finding that prohibited
and also could she replenish some of our
reservoirs for housing discretionary
housing payments in Ealing because at a
time when the housing crisis was already
underway in Ealing accident is only
getting worse no stay
so in terms of the question about
self-employed where people have assets
that could be say savings set aside for
paying tax or similar then I think that
they need to be checked carefully and go
through that as they make their claim
because these will not be considered as
being part of savings in regard to the
16 thousand pound threshold in terms of
housing we have increased the lhj and
I'm sure that the discretionary housing
payments have gone to even council and
this is open for councilors to come back
to central government if they would like
this to be raised substantially across
to mark our mark Appa thank you very
much mr. speaker
it's very clear from what the secretary
state said both in her statement and in
answers to questions from other members
that Universal Credit has been much more
effective but scaling up to deal with
the unprecedented level of claims
arising from the Crone virus pandemic so
and I know from my own constituents
experience we get half the number of
problems than we did with the legacy
benefits so can I use this opportunity
to thank all of her staff including
those in my own constituency who
delivered universal credit and may they
continue to do so
I thank my noble friend for that he is
right the old system would not have
coped with what Universal crota credit
has actually stood up and helped over
milk 1.8 million people making that
claim go across to Curtis a month okay
thank you for calling me to speak today
mr. speaker may I remind the house that
back in March when I wrote to the
secretary of state ask him what
emergency measures were in place to
allow the department to cope with the
increase in new universal credit claims
I was told back then and the Secretary
of State has repeated today that her
department would be redeployed staff and
reviewing priority of work but I'm
afraid to say that months into this
crisis I still have constituents being
told the waiting time is 8 hours when
calling the claim line as a result many
have been forced to use food banks for
the first time so given the ongoing
issues my constituents are experiencing
will the Secretary of State give a
highest priority to resolve the
technical and capacity issues being
experienced by giving clearer guidance
to both the public and to the
hard-working DWP staff regarding the
correct process to make digital and
non-digital universal credit claims to
stay well Mr Speaker we did have
telephony issues I'm led to believe that
these are have been significantly
addressed particularly with the don't
call us we'll call you campaign can I
recommend that issue wants to
communicate to her constituents that she
consider asking them to use the journal
where necessary I appreciate not all of
them have internet access but now the
average waiting time should be
considerably lower and the last I'd
heard it was on average about five
minutes so please do look into that we
go across to under Carter under Carter
Thank You mr. speaker can I add my
thanks to the DWT a DWP team based
particularly in Warrington who've helped
to process claims swiftly for people in
my constituency over the last six weeks
on Friday I visited Warrington food bank
to meet the volunteers who are working
hard to support families who've fallen
on difficult times in my constituency
one of the concerns they raised is the
speed of recovery
when universal credit is advanced now
doesn't my right honourable friend agree
that ensuring anyone who receives an
advance to their benefits is given a
reasonable timeframe to pay this back so
who state well the advance is currently
recovered over 12 months so somebody in
a year will get 13 payments instead of
12 I should also point out to my noble
friends that also any deductions made in
that way are made at a maximum 25 30 %
of the you see payable and that will
help several people as well we now come
to the penultimate question governor
lenders if I can watch mr. speaker many
people have had to apply for universal
credit for the first time there is feel
that the spate DWP staff working hard
the system simply can't cope and it was
never intended to operate under such
extreme circumstances instead ships are
waiting weeks for the WEP phone calls
and those unable to verify our identity
unlike I told the application doesn't
exist
therefore they can't query so we should
do to prioritize new claim so universal
credit many of which are from people who
have paid money into a system for their
kids and no you think that the
contribution means next to nothing so
gonna stay I don't agree with the
Honorable Junction I think you see has
reacted very well to the increased
challenge but what I would say to him is
that there were initially problems with
the online verification there's an
additional scheme called confirm your
identity but between that and verify it
should be very straightforward for
people to get through that part of the
claim but can assure him he can also
arrange her constituents to contact the
DWP helpline and be processed that way -
final question from said there's Ben
Swain what increment in expenditure has
the Treasury to provided her Department
since the onset of this coronavirus
sagar estate well our new estimates are
being published I believe today or
tomorrow so I will refer my little
friend to that particular element in
terms of delegated spend but overall we
estimate about six and a half billion
pounds increase in welfare benefits for
the nation
i suspend the house for 30 minutes 5 or
6 p.m. it may be helpful to tell the
house I propose to continue with 30
minutes suspension from now but may
review the timings in the future
order order thank you everybody